#### Relating Regular & Context-free Languages:
- Right-Linear Grammar
	- A grammar is right inear if all rules are of the form:
		- T -> aR
		- assuming T , R ∈ N and a ∈ Σ.

- Regular Language
	- A language is regular if there is a right-linear grammar that generates it

- Context-Free Grammar
	- A Grammar is context-free if the left side of every rule is a single non-terminal

- Context-Free Language
	- A language is context-free if there is a context-free grammar that generates it

- Every regular language is context-free, but not vice versa.
	- as the example {a^n b^n | n ∈ N} demonstrates).

#### Parse Trees: 
- Definition:
	- A parse tree for a context-free grammar is a tree labelled by terminals, non-terminals and ε subject to the following rules: 
		- The root is labelled S
		- A vertext is a leaf iff it is labelled by a terminal or ε (the latter only for only-children)
		- For every non-leaf v, there is a rule with the label of v on the left, and the concatenation of the child labels on the right
- Theorem:
	- The language generated by a context free grammar consists exactly of the words built from the terminals on the leaves of finite parse trees, in order.

#### A context-free grammar:
- Consider the grammar with the rules: 
	- S -> ε
	- S -> aSbS
	- S -> bSaS
- Questions:
	- What is the language generated by this grammar?
	- How would a parse tree for the word abab look like?
	- How could a pushdown automaton for it work? 

#### Pumping Lemma - Prime Numbers: 
- Question:
	- Is Lp = {a^p | p is prime} a context-free language?
- Answer:
	- Suppose it **was** context-free. Then, by the **pumping lemma**, any long enough string in Lp could be split into parts that allow "pumping" (repeating some section).
	- Pick a **prime number m** big enough. The word is **a^m**.
	- The **pumping lemma** says we can split it as **uvwxy**, where **vx** is at least one `a`, and **vxw** is at most **k** long.
	- Repeating **vx** changes the length to **(ℓ + 1)(m - ℓ)**, which might not be prime anymore.
	- Since this produces a string **outside** Lp, we **contradict** the pumping lemma, proving Lp **is not context-free**

#### Context-sensitive grammars
- Definition:
	- A grammar is context sensitive if every rule is of the form:
		- wAu -> wvu
			- where v != ε
		- or S -> ε
			- where S never appears on the right hand side of a rule

#### Monotonic Grammars
- Definition:
	- A grammar is monotonic if for all rules  u -> w (except S -> ε) it holds that:
		- |u| <= |w|
		- and S never appears on the right hand side of a rule

- Theorem: 
	- Context-sensitive grammars and monotonic grammars describe the same languages. 

#### Why Monotonic is Important? 
- Question: Given a monotonic grammar G and a word w, how can we decide if w is within the language of G? 
	- Answer: Just apply the rules starting from S and backtrack whenever the current word consisting of terminals and non terminals is longer than |w|
	- There are at most (|w| * |G|)^|w| things to check
	- Deciding if w is within L(G) can probably not be done fast but it can be done for monotonic G.

